Also where...
Sorry, what's this term?
Yeah, what your full name is and where were you born?
Okay, my full name is Elijah...
The get up spelling later...
Modena Salisuo...
Modena Selatio...
Salisuo...
And where were you born?
Can I spell it for you?
We can do that outside when we do the form, but this is my note...
Oh, okay...
And then we'll do the official form with Donald...
And where were you born?
Nigeria...
What part of Nigeria?
Lagos...
Lagos, Nigeria...
Okay...
Elijah...
Are you a Muslim?
Yeah, Elijah...
Elijah...
But when you go to Hajj, they call you Elijah...
So that is why I'm bearing Elijah...
You understand now?
Yeah, so as a feminine...
Is that right?
Yes, it's feminine...
Okay, so...
Do you write it correct now?
I've...
Because instead of Hajj, it's Ajja...
Elijah...
You could have heard it before...
Anybody that goes to Hajj, they call it Elijah...
They call men Alaji...
Alaji...
Yes...
Okay, cool...
My name is Modena...
I think you can't...
Modena...
M-E-G-I-N-A...
Yes, kind...
Is that okay?
Yes, it's okay...
Donald will get the official spelling...
So it's correct on the form...
But this is just for conversation...
These are notes for me...
So I can have the conversation better...
So tell me about Lagos and Nigeria...
What do you remember of that area?
What do you remember growing up there?
Family, friends, the food...
What can you remember?
Well, I'm not growing up in Lagos...
I was growing up in Ijebu and Ibado...
In Nigeria...
Lagos is the former capital of Nigeria...
So I was growing up in Ijebu, Gosti and Oyo State, Ibado...
So I can remember that...
I go to school...
Primary school...
My primary school is...
Muscle and Primary School, Ijebu and Moshi...
So after that...
I continued my secondary school in Ayikwe High School, Ijebu Ayikwe...
Then from that, I moved down to Ibado...
I started doing business...
I started selling spare parts...
Motor spare parts...
I'm one of the distributors of glass industry...
No-skin glass, TSD and Isoglass...
TSD and Isoglass...
They are the only ones that produce glass in Africa...
Isoglass is the first in Africa...
While TSD is the second in Africa...
That TSD as...
As modern...
As another factory in UK here...
Which ever you see any glass motor...
That they put TSD in, triples...
Have you ever seen?
Okay...
If you look at your door of your car...
At times you will see triples here...
There's a grade of glass...
Yes...
They have company in Nigeria...
I'm one of the distributor...
And I'm the only lady that...
Have their distributing...
Though they have now closed down...
They closed down in 2005...
After I left Nigeria...
So...
When I was in Nigeria, I was a big business woman...
Selling glass motor...
Isoglass...
And...
And spare parts...
For cars and lorries...
So...
Then...
Suddenly because my ex-husband...
Is a nurse...
So the calling...
He apply here...
So the...
When he apply here...
They call him to come and work here...
So he travel in 2003...
So when he travel in 2003...
Then...
He has to come and meet him in 2004...
That's why I left my business to come and join him...
Do you know what Pethu called him?
Can I own that?
Sure...
You can tell her how you wish...
So when I join him...
Before we arrive here in the UK...
I've got questions about UK...
Can you tell me about like...
What was the place like growing up?
Like, you know...
What memories you have?
What games did you play?
Okay...
Well...
What good memories you have?
You may have some bad memories...
Yes, yes, yes...
I didn't have...
I can't say I have bad memories in Nigeria...
But...
I have very good memories...
Because I come from the...
I come from the rich house...
My family are very rich...
Because...
My first travelling is...
1986...
I go to Hatch to perform Hatch...
That time...
So...
Then...
Because of my family background...
When I got married in 2009...
In 1990...
When I got married...
We...
When...
In Africa...
When we are celebrating...
We invite the musicians to come and play music for us...
So...
The musicians they play for...
They play...
Play in that...
My marriage ceremony is Salawa Bene...
And Waka System...
Okay...
And...
I enjoy my childhood...
But as you asked that...
Which kind of play that we play...
No...
We don't have...
We just have outside play...
When I was little...
But...
That outside play...
I don't know how to describe it...
Because we play...
We play outside...
Like using stones...
To play...
By...
When...
Can I describe it?
Okay...
That play is...
We line...
We use a stick to line the floor...
Then we put stone...
We throw stone...
Then we do like this...
Who's going to catch it?
Hopscotch...
Yeah, you call it hopscotch...
Okay...
So...
Only that good there without...
Without...
Rolling down or...
Without shaking...
That is perfect...
So to pick the...
That is the type of play that I play...
When my youth...
When I was little...
Good...
So you...
So...
You had quite a playful childhood...
Simple...
Yes...
Not too stressful...
Not stressful...
So let's go to the UK then...
You arrived in UK...
And then when I arrived...
What year did you arrive?
2004...
Can you remember...
The first week...
What did it feel like?
Yeah...
Okay...
The first week I arrived...
I arrived UK...
Is that...
Okay, let's start from the first day...
First day, start there...
Okay...
When I arrived in UK...
The first day...
See, when I want to sleep...
I asked my...
That my...
Is that...
Please close the door...
And lock it...
Because you didn't lock it...
You just jammed it...
So there's no need for that...
I said, why...
If somebody just come in...
Say no, no, no, no...
There's no need...
Then I asked about the iron gates...
Because in our country...
That is the main...
Risk...
Because there's no security...
So when they said me...
No, no, no, no...
There's no...
Come and look...
There's no iron gate...
There's nothing...
Okay...
I'm now thinking...
That...
It is how people live here...
No security...
You said if anything happen...
Just die, die, die...
They will come now...
You say...
Wow...
That's fine...
So...
I said, why...
Why did you lock it?
Because you didn't lock it...
Since that day...
I think...
I must leave here...
Instead of me to go back...
Because...
In Nigeria...
I have everything...
People are having...
I don't have any problem...
But the problem is security...
You cannot move without fear...
Even when there is...
Huts there...
But still...
You have to wind up...
Using your aircon...
And in the house...
You have to do wiring...
Fence...
Big fence...
Everything too...
And...
That's it...
So when I arrive here...
Security is the...
My main...
Thing that I leave...
What was the weather like?
It was very different...
Okay, yes...
Weather is different...
Yes...
That one is natural...
So as far as...
Okay, how was your first winter?
Yes...
Because...
The time that I come is summertime...
Summertime...
Then I...
When it's time for night...
Seven days...
See...
Moon outside...
He said...
Wow...
So...
The night will never fall...
In this country...
Then he is telling me that...
The night will fall but...
It's going to be around...
After nine...
Ten o'clock...
I said...
Wow...
Ah...
I like it...
So...
I'm happy...
But...
Then I asked him...
How am I going to pray?
He is telling me that...
There is an app...
That we are going to follow the app...
Whatever the...
Announcements are done for...
That it's time for prayer...
Yes...
Then I think that...
How am I going to do my Ramadan?
Because...
How am I going to fast until...
Ten o'clock in the night?
He said...
Maybe during the Ramadan...
It's going to fall...
During the time that...
It's going to be winter...
I said...
So there is winter...
Now he is telling me...
How the weather is...
Summer...
Winter...
So...
He said...
Okay, I will wait...
I'm so lucky that that time...
Is winter...
It's Ramadan...
So we have to fast from...
Ten o'clock...
Ramadan...
So we have to fast from...
Six till...
Four o'clock...
In the evening...
So that is it...
So it was okay...
But you were able to pray...
Which is a bit complicated...
But you got that...
Yes...
Okay...
Can you tell me about...
How you settled into the UK...
So like...
Maybe making friends...
Or meeting Age Alive...
Or whatever it was...
What did you do to...
To socialise...
And to bring your cultural practice here to the UK...
Okay...
Well...
I don't have to rely...
Because...
As I told you...
That before I come here...
I come from rich family...
So I don't have time for friends...
For friendship in my own country...
Because...
When I left secondary school...
I joined my family in business...
So...
It was...
All my friends...
We happened to meet in the shop...
After the shop...
I'm not saying more...
That means...
Those people who are beside me...
That's telling me...
And most of them they are men...
No women among them...
Only...
The women among them is those people that marry the man...
But...
I'm the only one that is young...
That I'm a woman among them...
The young people there too is men...
So that is why...
There is no...
I can't...
I cannot go and play with them...
On Saturdays we used to do parties...
A lot in my country...
But I'm not attending...
Because I don't have women friend...
So...
I just keep on to my shop...
To my shop...
Understand?
And...
When I come here...
Then on Sunday I just used to...
Wash my clothes...
Set myself down with my children...
Because...
I have housemaid...
That doing...
Housework for me...
Taking care of my children...
Like that...
In shop too I have houseboys...
That used to help me sell my markets...
I would just go to the company...
Sit down in my shop...
At times reading Quran...
At times just talking to customer...
When they bring the customer in...
So that is why I don't have time to socialize with people...
But when I come here...
You know what I'm not doing before...
So...
I never...
I never worked in any company before...
I never had monthly salary before...
So all that one I started here...
So when I come here after two months...
I started looking for a job...
So when I reach one place I ask them...
When they want to give me job...
They ask me...
Have you ever do this type of job?
I say no no no...
I'm a self employed...
I never do it before...
And...
They said no they can't give me work...
Because...
I will not know how to do it...
If you teach me how to do it I will do it...
Because I'm over 40...
So...
I know what I'm doing...
So then they employ me...
So when they employ me...
I started working with them...
Then...
One of our town friends here...
Come to tell me...
Because he's the one that stand for me as guarantee...
So...
He's telling me that...
Where they put me to...
Is too far from house...
That I'm going to use all my...
Money on FOI...
So...
Then I tell them...
When they angry with me that...
Oh they told you that you can't do it...
I said...
If you have anyone in this city it's okay...
I said no...
Okay...
So then I left them...
I work in another place...
So I left them...
I started looking for another job...
Then I get another job...
So that is how I started working...
I work in industry for a year...
Then after that...
They stopped me...
What industry is this?
Bikri...
Afana Bikri...
So I worked there for a year...
So when I worked there for a year...
Then they stopped me...
I don't know...
I thought that they employed me fully...
You know...
I don't know anything...
But when they stopped me...
Then I said...
Why did I do wrong?
They said no you didn't do anything wrong...
You are not a full employee...
Just hire you because...
Some people are sick or some people go on...
What do you do?
So then I started looking for another job...
Then I got a job for...
Newport City Council...
At school...
So then I started doing cleaning job...
Since that...
That is 2005...
Till now...
I am still working with them...
So tell me about your culture...
Muslim...
What practices do you...
Still practice that you did in Nigeria...
That you do here...
Food...
Music...
Religion...
Faith...
What do you still use here?
Okay...
You know...
As I told you that...
I am a Muslim...
My parents are Muslim...
But...
They are Muslim by mouth...
They used to pray five times in a day...
But they don't know...
They don't know much about it...
Because they are Muslim by...
How do I call it...
I forgot the name that I want to use...
For them...
So...
But...
The...
But when I want to marry...
When I am about to marry...
My man...
My ex-man...
That time...
I introduced him to the house...
That this is my man...
I want to marry...
Firstly...
When they send me to Hajj...
They don't send me to Hajj...
Because they know about Islam...
They send me to Hajj...
Because they have money...
To go and perform Hajj...
Because in our country...
Hajj works...
They respect those people who have money...
They respect those people who go to Hajj...
To perform Hajj...
That is why...
When we come back from Hajj...
Whenever your name...
Your name will now change...
Understand?
Like...
Me in that ambian in Medina...
When I come back from Hajj...
They will call me that name again...
They will now call me Aladja... Aladja...
Do you understand?
Do you understand now?
So...
If you are a man...
When you come back...
They will now call you Aladja...
So wherever you go...
When the head is...
Ah! This one is Aladja...
They will give you more respect...
So...
That is it...
Apart from that...
We have Christians...
We have Muslims...
We have traditional religions...
That we are living together happily...
In every family...
We see the three...
That three religions...
That is Islam...
Christianity...
And...
Tradition...
In the family...
So...
And it depends on...
Which one you belong to...
During the...
Idil Kebid festival...
And Idil Fitri festival...
They will come to us to do...
Our festival...
The Christian will come...
The traditional people will come...
Excuse me then...
When they do their own festival...
We join them...
We do it together...
And...
In my family...
They like...
They are socialites...
That is what I want to say...
They are Muslim socialites...
They like social...
They used to drink alcohol...
They used to play...
They...
They invite musicians...
Whenever we want to do something...
We invite musicians...
Musicians will come here to play for us...
But...
When I want to marry...
Then...
Apart from that one...
It is part of our culture...
That...
Rich people will not marry...
Those people who are not rich...
They are against it...
So...
And as for me...
When I want to marry...
I decide not to do that...
But my parents are against it...
The fight...
That no...
I will not marry them...
But in our home...
We are not choosing for our guests...
And they are not choosing for our men too...
You choose whoever you like...
Then when you bring them home...
The family will now debate...
That...
Is it good for you or is it not good for you...
Then...
When I choose my own husband...
They said no...
But...
I should not marry him...
That he is going to disrespect me in Fushu...
Because...
If he has money in Fushu...
He will go for another lady...
Then I said...
Okay...
Let's try...
Because he said he will never do that...
Because when he goes to the screw of nothing...
I give...
I used to give him pocket money...
Because he doesn't have money on his side...
But at that time...
Nigeria is still good...
The government sponsored him...
So I just gave him pocket money...
When I am about to introduce him to my house...
Because our own Koshu...
That's why I said...
They don't know much about Islam...
We have boyfriends...
We have gay friends...
Like this place...
But the difference is that...
We don't call them...
Boyfriend or gay friend...
If...
If anybody has shite for you...
It's your wife...
No matter...
Whether you do the marriage or not...
Understand?
And...
If at all, if you didn't have shite for you...
But you are living together...
They will call you husband and wife...
So you may not do marriage at last...
You will do...
So...
Like me now...
Because they are against it...
My family is against it...
But I decided that's what I want to do...
So at the end of the day...
When he finishes school...
My family asks me that...
Okay, if you said that's the person you want to marry...
We are going to release you...
Because I told them that...
If I don't marry him, I won't marry him...
Because that time I was full...
Because I realized what they told me...
That's what he did...
When he went bikini...
So...
And that time I...
Think that...
He is my first man...
I will not leave him...
Unless he said I don't want...
I will stay with him...
Then when he finishes school...
Then my parents ask me...
Where is he going to live?
I said he is going to look for work...
He said, no, you can come to this site and look for work...
Then they give us a flat...
Complete building...
So we lived together there for 15 years...
Without paying cover...
He didn't know how I prepared the food for him...
I prepared the food for him...
He never spent on my children...
I have four boys...
He never paid their school fees...
Because in Nigeria you pay your school fees...
Anything you want you do not like here...
That you can go to hospital free...
You can do this free...
You did everything with your money...
So everything we did in Nigeria...
Before he came here he knew nothing about it...
He lived with me for 15 years...
He has two brothers that came to live with me...
And is one of his friends...
They are four that come to my house to live...
They live in Nigeria three times a day...
Because in Nigeria we eat three times a day...
We are not used to eat this one...
Eat this one...
At any time...
No...
We eat three times a day...
Only...
We are not using to drink.
You know, just, you know, when you eat something, you drink, you hit at any time, you're like,
no, our eating based on the time we did it.
So, we lived together for, before we do the wedding, we lived together.
I have my first born in 1988.
In Nigeria.
In Nigeria. All my children were born in Nigeria.
So, I have my first born in 1988.
And at the end of the day, my parents said, okay, we are going to do the wedding.
Because his father said, his father insisted that he want to do the wedding.
Of course.
They wanted to do the wedding in 1990.
So, when we do the wedding, they spend a lot of money on me and do everything as they're supposed to do.
That's why I said, I enjoy a lot.
It's when I come here. It's a change.
What they tell me in 1986, when I bring in O to meet my parents, is now coming up.
When I come here, you know, it's now in us.
I'm now here.
It's now telling me that we do mistake by marrying after not five years together.
So, you know, it's lost.
But unfortunately, when I come here too, I started to work in, I don't have friends.
I keep to myself as I don't like to have friends before.
No, I told you from shop to house, from shop to house, from shop to house.
But when I come here and I started working, I face my work, I make friends within the working environment.
After the working, everybody goes to work as I'm doing before.
But unfortunately, when it left me in 2015, all my children who are growing up, they all married.
Because when I reached here, I started to continue studying Islam.
When I started studying Islam, I grew up with it much more better than Nigeria.
Because that time, I want to practice it as it is supposed to be practiced.
My family are getting annoyed with me.
If I tell them, you are doing what is not good, you spend a lot on nonsense.
You don't have to do this really.
But they are telling me that I go astray. I go astray. I go astray.
Do you understand?
But when I was here, I started to use what I read before.
Because now I'm lonely. I don't see my parents again. I don't see anybody again except him.
When we arrived in 2004, I noticed him that he changed.
You never drink alcohol at home, but he is now drinking alcohol.
And it's now changed.
When I told him, you have four boys, they never see you drinking alcohol.
He said, oh, you are in the UK, you can do whatever you like.
Do whatever you like. UK means you came.
That is how it started.
At the end of the day, 2015, when his children got married, he decided, oh, he wants me out of the house.
That is how I'm now thinking that.
He wants me out of this house.
And before I continue.
So how did you find Age Alive as a project?
Yes, that is where I'm going.
My children support me because I spent a lot of time with them.
They know that I never do anything except that I bring them here.
And when I bring them here, I leave them with me.
That is why I started working immediately.
So tell me about how you have grown and what does Age Alive feel?
That is where I am going.
If not because he left, I wouldn't know Age Alive.
My children, when they marry, they marry white people.
And they convert them into Muslim.
So I now follow their groups.
They converted Muslims and Muslims, born Muslims.
So they do the gathering, then I go to their gathering.
When I go to their gathering, I have to stop some working.
Some of my work.
At times I work almost 24 hours a day because it is in my blood before.
Before I come here, I work 12 hours a day from 6 to 6.
So I have to drop some of my work.
Now I face my grandchildren, my daughter-in-law.
So we move together.
That is why as we are moving from one place to another, that is how I met Age Alive.
How has life been since Age Alive?
I enjoy them.
When they introduced Age Alive to me, they said they are doing exercise.
Everyone is doing.
They tell me the time.
I say, that is fine.
All the work I can do, I can do it.
My work starts at 3 o'clock.
It is okay.
So then I continue with them.
Then when I am with them, we talk a lot.
I told them that if people suffer before they come here, I never suffer.
I suffer in this country.
I didn't suffer from government.
I suffer from the person that brought me to the country.
But government, yes, fear for me.
Because if they didn't fear for me, I would have left the house.
Then we would have been able to marry.
Because if it was my country, we would have been able to marry again.
Because we would have left my mother's, my parents' house and built our home.
Or if we didn't go and build our home, we have houses that we built already.
We would have packed and left outside.
Understand?
With another lady that won't see us for life when he has money.
Because when he brings us here because he has money, that's why he does that.
And if it was my country, people would now tell me that, yes, yes, he is still your husband.
You have to submit.
You have to do this.
You have to do that.
That is the difference.
That if you want to go and let him go, you can remarry.
Let him have his own life.
And I'm happy with that statement.
I'm happy with that statement that let him have his own life.
Let me have my own life.
But I will not go against my Quran.
Because Quran tells us not to have a girlfriend or boyfriend.
Not to go into prostitution.
I limit myself by having fun with people but not to have any intercourse with anybody.
That is why I love this country for that.
So I'm free.
Though my parents are Tundu, I don't have a mother or father again.
But I still have brothers.
They tell me that.
Remember, we told you, you have to submit.
I said no.
Forget about submitting.
If he goes the wrong way, I won't follow him.
I will go the right way.
I will do the right one.
The right one is to be on my own.
To do my life as I like.
That is why I like Ece Life.
I enjoy them.
But unfortunately, when there is the pandemic, I have to get another job.
And that job is tying me down up to now that I cannot make up to go to their club.
Times will change.
Times will change in time.
Yes, times will change.
My final question is, if your great-great-great-great-great-grandchildren are researching their great-great-great-great-grandmother,
what message would you leave them in this archive?
The message I want to leave them is to be good.
First of all, they should do religion by practicing Islam.
Because before I started really practicing, you know I told you that when I go to Hajj, I know nothing about Islam.
My parents know nothing about Islam.
They send me because they want people to respect me because they have money.
And if they don't send me out to perform Hajj, people won't know that.
Because you know you cannot put money on your body.
But if they know that you have one great-great-great-great-great-grandmother,
they will respect you as I told you.
Anybody that goes to Hajj, they will respect the person.
So that's what they want from me.
So when I come back, as I told you that we are Christians,
the Christian people in my eyes, we are trading.
They come together and they want me to join their religion.
They are now preaching to me because they know that my parents are not deep Muslims.
They don't know.
So they started preaching to me.
Then I decided that I want to join them.
I want to join them.
That's fine.
Then I told my foolish mother and father that I want to join Christianity.
They said, don't join them.
I said, why?
They said, okay.
Then they give me a comparative book.
Excuse me.
So I read it.
When I read it, I shall learn them.
I ask them.
It is what you call the gospel.
Then they know that I know what is inside their Bible.
So they now say, oh, don't go near Elijah.
Don't go near her because she's not possessed.
She's not possessed.
So that's why they don't know.
That's why I know that wherever I go in the world, my Islam is number one.
Unless you tell me, you bring me another book that telling me is not right.
So that is what that is the legacy I want to give my great grand children.
Firstly, you have to do Islam.
Unless you tell me that you see another one.
Because even inside the Quran, the Quran says that if they tell you something, read it and compare it with Quran.
So I'm the best.
So if you don't see anything, you have to do the best.
That is number one.
Then number two is that to be kind.
If you are a Muslim, if you are a real Muslim, you have to be kind.
Because whenever Quran tells us, Quran says pray and be kind.
Pray and do good.
Wherever Quran mentions about prayer, it says do good.
Do good and pray.
And that is what we call humanity.
Because if you do good to people, that is humanity.
Then you serve your God.
It is great.
So that is what I want to give.
Thank you very much.
I have no other questions.
Anything else you would like to say or add?
I mean, I think we've gone through Nigeria, we've arrived, gone through family, we've gone through some hardships to understand.
We've talked about the importance of your faith and your message to your great-great-great-grandchildren.
Anything else you would like to say, leave a message for?
The message is do good.
Pray and do good.
Pray to your God and do good.
And don't just pray.
Do the right thing.
That is Islam.
Unless there is another one that comes up.
Even in the Quran, the Quran tells us how he made mankind.
That I am your maker.
This is how I made you.
And the scientist said, yes.
What he says is correct.
That nobody can see that except the God Almighty.
So Alhamdulillah, that is the legacy I want to give my great-great-great-great-grandchildren.
Thank you very much.